Natural Resources Conservation Service  

 

  

 

LITTLE BLUESTEM 
Schizachyrium scoparium 
(Michx.) Nash 
Plant Symbol = SCSC 

Alternate Names 
Common Names:  povertygrass, broom bluestem, broom 
beardgrass, prairie beardgrass, small feathergrass 
Scientific Names:  Andropogon scoparius 

Description 
General:  Little bluestem is a tufted (sometimes with 
short rhizomes), warm-season (C4), perennial grass 
broadly distributed and native to the U.S. and Canada. 
Because of this broad distribution, little bluestem exhibits 
significant ecotypic variation.  Plants vary in height, 
color, length of leaves, flowering, and clump diameter 
(USDA, 1983; Uchytil, 1989). It grows from 1 to 3 feet 
tall with culms slightly flattened.  The blades are folded, 
sometimes rolled inward, and smooth to hairy.  They are 2 
to 12 inches long, 1.5-6 mm wide, pointed with sheaths 
keeled and usually smooth.  The ligule is a fringed 
membrane 0.5-2.5 mm long.  The culms terminate in a 
single raceme 1-3 inches long.  The pediceled spikelets 
are 3-6 mm long with pedicels flattened.  The awns of the 

Plant Guide 

fertile lemmas are 9-16 mm long, bent and twisted.  The 
anthers are 2-4 mm long (Sedivec and Barker, 1997).  
Seed averages 225,000 to 250,000 bearded seeds per 
pound (Uchytil, 1989). 

Distribution:  Little bluestem is found throughout the 
lower provinces of Canada and all states of the U.S., 
except Nevada and Washington.  For current distribution, 
please consult the Plant Profile page for this species on 
the PLANTS Web site. 
 
Habitat:  This midgrass is a tallgrass prairie increaser and 
mixed prairie decreaser.  Little bluestem typically occurs 
on dry upland sites, especially on ridges, hilltops, and 
steep slopes.  It also occurs on limey subirrigated sites 
and in prairie fens.  It is found in areas receiving 10 to 60 
inches of mean annual precipitation and plant hardiness 
zones 3 to 9. 

Adaptation 
Little bluestem is adapted to soils ranging from sandy to 
clay-loam in texture.  It begins growth in late spring after 
cool-season species have already developed (Uchytil, 
1989). It has been observed that little bluestem phenology 
follows a well-defined pattern.  Periods of active growth 
as well as stage of maturity are directly related to the 
length of the growing season (Miller, 1967; USDA, 
1983). 

Uses 
Pasture/rangeland/prairie restoration:  This species 
provides fair to good forage while young.  It is rated fair 
for cattle and horses, but is usually too coarse for sheep 
and goats.  Ungrazed wolf plants with seed stalks often 
give the false impression of non-use for the plant 
community.  Shorter plants between the wolf plants have 
usually been grazed quite extensively.  Crude protein is 
12 to 14 percent in May, dropping off considerably in 
July through September to less than 4 percent (Sedivec 
and Barker, 1997).  Little bluestem has been used 
extensively in prairie restoration projects primarily 
because of its adaptation to a diversity of sites, drought 
tolerance, growth habit, and wildlife appeal. 
 
Erosion control:  Little bluestem has moderate drought 
tolerance and broad adaptation to diverse sites. It can 
form mats from short rhizomes on wetter sites although 
this species is usually thought of as a bunchgrass (clumps) 
on dry, upland sites.  It is deep-rooted, and somewhat 
slow to establish from seed. 
 
Wildlife:  Little bluestem is one of the best grasses for 
nesting and roosting habitat.  The clump type of growth 
habit and many fine leaves at the base provide excellent 
nesting sites.  The seeds are consumed by small mammals 

 

and birds, including upland game birds, rosy finches and 
juncos, as well as chipping, field, and tree sparrows.  The 
seeds are of high value especially as a food source for 
birds that spend the winter on grasslands, such as prairie 
chickens and sharp-tailed grouse (Jones, 1963).  
Meadowlarks nest in areas where little bluestem grows.  
The dusky skipper butterfly caterpillars overwinter in tube 
tents above the base of the clumps (Knopf et al., 1997). 
 
Landscaping:  Little bluestem is becoming more popular 
for home landscaping because it is a colorful and easy-
care addition.  New varieties are being developed that 
don’t lodge (falling over at the base) and are more disease 
resistant.  New growth can be bluish, maturing to a 
reddish-gold color.  The seed develops to a fluffy silver-
white.  The plumes are showy when seed has matured 
which adds interest to a cut arrangement.  Frost accents 
the plants and the reddish tint provides color during the 
winter (Mahr, 2007).  This is a prairie grass for the garden 
that is truly exceptional in mass plantings.  Use in full 
sun. 
 
Ethnobotany:  Some tribes used little bluestem switches 
in ceremonial sweat lodges.  The Lakota word means 
“small red grass”.  Dried leaves and stems were rubbed 
into soft fiber for moccasin lining and insulation (Johnson 
and Larson, 1999).  

Status 
Please consult the PLANTS web site 
(http://plants.usda.gov) and your State Department of 
Natural Resources for this plant’s current status (e. g. 
threatened or endangered species, state noxious status, 
and wetland indicator values).  
 
Weediness:  This plant may become weedy or invasive in 
some regions or habitats and may displace more desirable 
vegetation if not properly managed.  The seed is light and 
fluffy, and may spread to the surrounding areas, 
especially in a garden or landscape setting.  Seed is 
generally dispersed a short distance from the parent 
plants.  The maximum dispersal is only 5 to 6 feet and 
seedling vigor is weak (Uchytil, 1989).  Consult with your 
local NRCS Field Office, Cooperative Extension Service 
office, state natural resource, or state agriculture 
department regarding its status and use.  Weed 
information is also available from the PLANTS Web site 
at http://plants.usda.gov/.  Consult the Related Web Sites 
on the Plant Profile for this species for further 
information. 

Management 
Little bluestem begins growth later in the spring after the 
cool-season species have already developed.  It tolerates 
glyphosate when dormant, and other herbicides as labeled 
for grasses.  Weed control can be accomplished by 
mowing, especially the first year when the planted grass is 
short.  It is minimally affected by fire if burned dormant 
and changes little in frequency of occurrence due to fire.  

Little bluestem is relatively resistant to fire under moist 
conditions.  The growing points (apical meristem) are 
slightly more than an inch above the soil surface (Uchytil, 
1989).  Little bluestem in the immature growth phase is 
considered a nutritional, palatable grass for all classes of 
livestock in June and early July in studies in North and 
South Dakota.  Palatability is lower than many other 
native warm-season grasses, especially when seed stalks 
are present.  Proper grazing management is critical to 
improve grazing efficiency.  Little bluestem is an 
increaser under season long grazing systems. Higher stock 
densities such as rotational grazing systems will achieve 
greater use of more plants.  Recommended stubble height 
of 3 to 4 inches is required to assure stand longevity.  
Although not usually recommended for hay production, 
little bluestem can make fair to good hay when part of a 
native hayland mixture (Sedivec et al., 2008).  It is a 
popular species to include in prairie restoration seedings 
because of its wide adaptation and high wildlife value.  
Plants will sometimes die from the center out in the clump 
if the plants become too dry.  Burning at the opportune 
time can help to reduce the population of cool-season 
competing vegetation, as well as woody species. 

Pests and Potential Problems  
A leaf spot disease was found to be widespread in a little 
bluestem nursery established at Mandan, North Dakota, 
from plants collected in North Dakota, South Dakota, and 
Minnesota.  Phyllosticta andropogonivora was 
consistently isolated from leaves showing leaf spot 
symptoms.  The fungus was also isolated from native 
prairie plants.  The fungus was pathogenic to little 
bluestem, big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), and sand 
bluestem (Andropogon halli) (Krupinsky and Tober, 
1990). 

Environmental Concerns 
This grass is primarily a bunchgrass that will spread some 
by seed.  The seed is light and fluffy and it will move to 
adjacent areas.  Bare soil may allow seed to germinate, 
but it is usually not a problem.  Random plants in a 
natural landscape are usually not considered undesirable 
because it is a native species. 

Control 
Please contact your local agricultural extension specialist 
or county weed specialist to learn what works best in your 
area and how to use it safely.  Always read label and 
safety instructions for each control method.  Trade names 
and control measures appear in this document only to 
provide specific information.  USDA NRCS does not 
guarantee or warranty the products and control methods 
named, and other products may be equally effective. 

Seeds and Plant Production 
Seed into a firm seedbed in early spring for best results.  
Seed as a solid stand (8 inches or less row spacing) at 
approximately 4.5 lb/acre (eastern ND rate), or 30 seeds 
per linear foot of row, or 2.5 lb/acre for 24-inch rows.  
Glyphosate may be used for weed control immediately 

 

 

after seeding to kill everything green and growing.  Other 
herbicide weed control options are also available.  
Consult with the local extension service or Land Grant 
University for assistance with recommendations on 
herbicides and application rate.  Always read and follow 
the label directions when applying herbicides.  Mention of 
a trademark or proprietary product does not constitute a 
guarantee or warranty of the product by the U.S. 
government and does not imply its approval to the 
exclusion of other products that may also be suitable.  
 
Seed is best harvested from the plant using a commercial 
stripper at 600 to 800 rpm at the hard dough or mature 
seed stage.  This is because of the light, fluffy seed, and 
the uneven maturity.  Straight combining is another 
method of harvest when most of the seed has matured.  
Average dockage of combined seed is 60 percent.  Seed 
should be air dried for a couple of days.  Seed for the bin 
should be dried to 12 percent or less, and sacked seed 
should be 15 percent or less.  Average yield is 200 to 300 
lb/acre irrigated and 75 to 150 lb/acre dryland.  
Processing the seed is fairly difficult because of the 
fuzziness of individual spikelets.  It should be debearded 
first.  A hammermill works well with a 3/16-inch screen 
at 550 rpm, and then a debearder at 200 rpm for 45 to 60 
minutes.  Scalping or final cleaning may be done using a 
4-screen fanning mill.  Post-harvest management requires 
rotary mowing, rototilling, or cultivating between rows in 
the fall or spring; or burning on a regular basis in early 
spring (Smith et al., 1989). 
 
Plants may be grown in the greenhouse using standard 
greenhouse procedures.  Deeper containers (4 inches or 
more) are recommended because perennial grasses 
develop extensive root systems.  A critical factor in 
growing little bluestem is day length.  A study in North 
Dakota required 18 hours of artificial light each day for 
continued growth of seedling little bluestem plants 
(USDA, 1983) during the winter months. 

Little bluestem has high genetic diversity. 

 

TX 
2016 
TX 
2015 
2015 
TX 
2010  MO 
NC 
2008 
IN 
2005 

Cultivars, Improved, and Selected Materials (and area 
of origin)  
‘The Blues’, ‘Prairie Blues’, ‘Blue Heaven’, ‘Carousel’, 
and several other varieties have been developed for 
landscaping and ornamental use.  Sources for 
conservation planting showing the year of release, and 
origin include the following:  
Coastal Plains Germplasm 
STN-176 Germplasm* 
STN-461 Germplasm* 
Ozark Germplasm 
Suther Germplasm 
Prairie View Indiana 
Germplasm 
OK Select Germplasm 
Spirit Ecovar (Canada) 
Southlow Michigan 
Germplasm 
2001 
Itasca Germplasm 
2000  MB,SK 
Taylor Ecovar (Canada) 
1999 
Southern Iowa Germplasm 
Northern Iowa Germplasm 
1999 
Northern Missouri Germplasm  1999 
1997 
Central Iowa Germplasm 
1996 
Badlands Ecotype 
1979 
‘Cimmaron’ 
1973 
‘Camper’ 
1967 
‘Blaze’ 
1966 
‘Aldous’ 
1964 
‘Pastura’ 

IA 
IA 
IA 
IA 
ND,SD 
KS,OK 
NE,KS 
NE,KS 
KS 
NM 

2003 
2003 
2001  MI 

OK 
SK,MB 

ND,SD,MN 

*Carrizo Blend is a commercial post-harvest blend of STN-176 
Germplasm and STN-461 Germplasm. The blend should contain no 
more than 50 ± 10% of each of the two germplasms. 
 
Literature Cited 
Johnson, J. and G. Larson. 1999.  Grassland plants of South 
Dakota and the Northern Great Plains.  South Dakota 
State University, Brookings, SD. 

Jones,  R.  1963.  Identification  and  analysis  of  lesser  and 
greater  prairie  chicken  habitat  J.  Wildl.  Manage. 
27:757-778. 

Knopf, J., S. Wasowski, J. Boring, G. Keator, J. Scott, E. 

Glasener. 1997.  A guide to natural gardening. Fog 
City Press, San Francisco, CA. 

Krupinsky J. and  D. Tober. 1990. Leaf spot disease of 

little bluestem, big bluestem, and sand bluestem 
caused by Phyllosticta andropogonivora.  Plant Dis. 
74(6):442-445.  

Mahr S. 2007.  Little bluestem.  Hort. Newsletter, Univ. 

of Wisconsin, Madison, WI. 

Miller, R. 1967.  Ecotypic variation in Andropogon 

scoparious and Bouteloua gracilis.  Fort Collins, 
Colorado State University, dissertation.  Abstract. 
Sedivec, K. and W. Barker. 1997.  Selected North Dakota 

and Minnesota range plants. EB-69, NDSU 
Extension Service, Fargo, ND.  
 

 

 

 

Sedivec, K., D. Tober, W. Duckwitz, D. Dewald, J. 

Printz, and D. Craig.  2008. Grasses for the northern 
plains: growth patterns, forage characteristics, and 
wildlife values, vol. II – warm-season.  USDA-
NRCS, Bismarck, ND and NDSU, Fargo, ND.   

Smith R. and S. Smith (Ed.). 1989.  Native grass seed 

production manual.  Ducks Unlimited Canada, Oak 
Hammock Marsh, MB, Canada 

Uchytil, R. 1989. Wildlife, Animals, and Plants 
Schizachyrium scoparium.   [Online]. 
(http://reference.allrefer.com/wildlife-plants-
animals/plants/graminoid/schsco/all.html). 
USDA-SCS. 1983.  Part 1, Annual Technical Report, 

USDA-SCS Plant Materials Center, Bismarck, ND.   

Citation 
Tober, D. and N. Jensen. 2013. Plant guide for little 
bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium).  USDA Natural 
Resources Conservation Service, Plant Materials Center, 
Bismarck, North Dakota 58501 

Published:  May 2013 

Edited:  May 2016 

For more information about this and other plants, please 
contact your local NRCS field office or Conservation 
District at http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/ and visit the 
PLANTS Web site at http://plants.usda.gov/ or the Plant 
Materials Program Web site http://plant-
materials.nrcs.usda.gov.  PLANTS is not responsible for 
the content or availability of other Web sites. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Helping People Help the Land 

USDA IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROVIDER AND EMPLOYER 

